1. These are comments on a manuscript entitled "Testing if gravity can be described by a quadratic with respect to time" by Cardillo, Croft, Kapoor, Pevzner, Sankritya, and Siddiqui. The MS claims to "verify" the "well known result that the vertical distance it travels due to gravity is described by a quadratic with respect to time with a leading coefficient closely related to the gravitational acceleration constant g". The MS explicitly "seeks to verify this result" (we NEVER just "validate" somethign with one measurement, we rule out alternatives and get provisional support for a hypothesis that is not ruled out by the data). The paper claims to measure g to 3 significant digits (!!!) as 9.422 m/s. This sort of overblown conclusion for a shoddy test of a hypothesis should be rejected!

2. Introduction: Equations of motion for an object are developed by integrating an assumed constant acceleration. The assumptions under which this is valid, or the motivation for doing this, is never really explained. The authors incorrectly claim "these three relationships fully describt the motion of objects moving due to Earth's gravitation field" (presumably they have never heard of the universal gravitation law, or air resistance etc.

3. Methods: The word choice and explanation of the string method is just wacky. The methods are overly complicated and given the details it appears very difficult if not impossible to replicate. The method is highly dependent on the human dropper with no explanation of whether human droppers were calibrated or trained or benchmarked in some way or if any more accurate methods were tried or even considered. Human touch sense of timing is highly dependent on reaction time and perception which are notoriously biased and slow; did the human sensors know what length adn what expected time was?

The authors give an explanation of their quadratic regression in the results section; this is the wrong place it should be under METHODS. The authors mention R^2 when this is probably not the right (nor only) statistic to quote. With a residual of 0.75m their claim to have measured a to 3 significant digits is highly suspect. A "widely accepted" value for g is quoted without a source. Rather than having a 4% error, how do we know these results have not just been gamed to match (indeed "prove") the authors prior assumed outcome (confirmation bias!)

